Emily Mamula
SoftDes Spring 2015
Mini-Project 3: Text Mining and Analysis

Project Overview:
For my project I chose to work with a text from Project Gutenberg, specifically
Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen to start. It then uses libraries from the
National Language Tool Kit and sentiment analysis from patterns to parse the 
entire text, find references to a specific character throughout and plot those
sentiment values over the course of the text. The original concept was to analyze
sentiment towards Mr. Darcy.


Implementation:
The goal of this code was to parse the text and separate all sentences for
processing. This involves collecting everything between punctuation that ends a
sentence. This is difficult because the text from Project Gutenberg includes a 
lot of new lines and many abbreviations with periods, both of which have to be 
considered to make the text easy to analyze.

Using the National Language Tool Kit, I collected all of the sentences within 
the text as separate entities to be analyzed. It splits at end-of-sentence 
punctuation, but without confusion from abbreviations (e.g. Mr., Mrs., etc.).
Once these sentences are collected and stripped of all non-text entities, I
cycle through all of them searching for references to the input character name.
Finally, the sentiment of the sentences where the character is mentioned are 
analyzed for sentiment using patterns and plotted in relation to their location
within the text.

The decision to use NLTK was based on its ability to cleanly separate the text.
I tried other methods that didn't handle abbreviations well or couldn't
efficiently get rid of new lines. NLTK ended up being the best option that I 
found.


Results:
My original concept with this was to analyze Pride and Prejudice for sentiments 
pertaining to Mr. Darcy, a main love interest who also happens to be a massive 
jerk. To this end, I plotted the sentiment of sentences referencing him 
throughout the text, assuming I would see a lot of negative feelings. This 
seems to track, as many of the references to him were negative.


Reflection:
A lot of my problems came from parsing the text. I tried more and less manual 
approaches before finally settling on NLTK. Overall, this project felt like 
filler to me, and I just really didn't connect with it. So while I managed to 
do something cool, I wasn't really into it. 
